[Ref guide] - Dojo Resources and data middleware (#722)
dojo/framework: docs/en/resource/supplemental.md

# Data Templates

Data templates tell the resource how to read data and can accept a generic which is used to type the transformer.
The template's `read` function receives three paramaters.

> -   options: This is a `ReadOptions` object consisting of the current `query`, the read `offset` and the page `size` to request.

Reviewer: stick options, put and get in code guards maybe?

-   put: This is a function that can be used to side-load data into the resource. This could be used by the template to pre-fetch data or to load the full data payload in a memory template. This function takes two parameters, an `offset` to place the data and the array of `data` to load. It is pre-configured to use the current `ReadOption` query when setting data.
-   get: This function can be used to query the current data in the resource. This function accepts a single parameter of the `query` string you wish to use.

## Creating a template

> A template is a simple object containing a `read` function. The read function recieves the params documented above which enable it to fetch and return the appropriate data. The read function should return both the `data` requested and the `total` number of results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A template is an object containing a `read` function. The read function receives the `ReadOptions` documented above which enable it to fetch and return the appropriate data. The `read` function should return both the `data` requested and the `total` number of results.
```

Reviewer: Should we also describe the interface in code terms? something like 

```tsx
interface ReadResults {
    data: any[];
    total: number;
}
```

Author: fair point

> main.ts

```ts
const fetcher = async (options: ReadOptions) => {
	const { offset, size, query } = options;

	const response = await fetchDataFromSomewhere(query, offset, size);
	const data = await response.json();

	return {
		data: data.data,
		total: data.total
	};
};

const template: DataTemplate = {
	read: fetcher
};
```

> ## Creating a memory template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Memory templates
```

> Sometimes we may want to create a template that works off of a local in-memory array rather than via an async endpoint. When creating this type of template, the same approach is taken but we have a couple of things to consider.

Reviewer: rather than "async endpoint" perhaps me more abstract and say remote data.

		// put the filtered data into the resource so it
		// won't try and read it again for the same query
		put(0, filteredData);
		// return the data that was requested
		return { data: filteredData, total: filteredData.length };
	}
};
```

## Initialising a resource with local data

When the local data you're using may change or is generated, an alternative approach is required to set up a memory template and pass data to the widget.

```ts
const memoryTemplate: DataTemplate = {
	read: ({ query }, get, put) => {
		// get the data from the resource
		let data: any[] = get();

		// filter the data
		const filteredData = filter && query ? data.filter((i) => filter(query, i)) : data;
		// put the filtered data into the resource so it
		// won't try and read it again for the same query
		put(0, filteredData);
		// return the data that was requested
		return { data: filteredData, total: filteredData.length };
	}
};

export default factory(function() {
	// pass a resource factory and the data to sideload
	// instead of just the resource
	return (
		<List
			resource={{
				resource: () => createResource(memoryTemplate),
				data: ['dog', 'fish', 'cat']
			}}
		/>
	);
});
```

> The above approach will allow the `data` to be changed at any time causing the resource to be cleared and the new data sideloaded again. This is the approach that should be used in most in memory data array scenarios and can be seen being used within our `TimePicker` widget when time options are generated and passed to the `Select`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach allows the `data` to be changed at any time, causing the resource to be cleared and the new data sideloaded again. This approach should be used for most in-memory data array scenarios - a good example is [Dojo's `TimePicker` widget](https://github.com/dojo/widgets/tree/master/src/time-picker), where time options are generated and passed to the underlying `Select`.
```

> # Data Middleware

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Data middleware
```

> The data middleware provides a widget with access to the underlying resource via the data middleware which offers an api to initialise and share the resource and functions to interact with it. The middleware should be imported and passed to the widgets `create` function the same as other middlwares. It will add two extra properties to your widget; `resource` and `transform`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The data middleware provides a widget access to the underlying resource and its data. It is comprised of an api to initialize and share the resource, as well as functions to interact with it. The data middleware should be imported and passed to a widget's `create` function in the same as any other middleware - when added to a widget, it exposes two extra widget properties - `resource` and `transform`.
```

> ```ts

Reviewer: This example doesn't really give me much, shall we put the data API here? that would help i think.

Author: sure

import { create } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';

> import { createDataMiddleware } from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/data';

Reviewer: you are importing `createDataMiddleware` but not using it?

Author: oops

const factory = create({ data });

> export const DataAwareWidget = factory(function ({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export const DataAwareWidget = factory(function DataAwareWidget({
```

	middleware: { data }
}) {
	const api = data();
}
```

> ## The Resource Property

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The resource property
```

> The resource property added to a widget can be used to pass a resource, a resource factory and data to initialise the resource with or a resource wrapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `resource` property is used to pass a `resource`, a `resource` factory and optionally `data` required initialise the `resource`.
```

> The resource property added to a widget can be used to pass a resource, a resource factory and data to initialise the resource with or a resource wrapper.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `resource` widget property can be used to pass a resource, a resource factory and data to initialize the resource with, or a resource wrapper.
```

> ### resource

Reviewer: Casing... it these are code then they can go in code guards otherwise they should be sentence case I believe.

> ### resource

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Passing a resource
```

> A resource is the result of the `createResource` function. It is a new resource and does not have any `ResourceOptions` or data middleware connections associated to it. This is how you will pass a resource into a widget in most cases pertaining to a remote data source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A resource is the result of the `createResource` function without any `ResourceOptions` or data middleware connections associated to it. This is how a resource is passed into a widget in most cases pertaining to a remote data source.
```

```tsx
import { DataTemplate, createResource } from '@dojo/framework/core/resource';
import { fetcher } from './personfetcher';
import { List } from './List';

const template: DataTemplate = {
	read: fetcher
};

const resource = createResource(template);

export default factory(function() {
	return <List resource={resource} />;
});
```

> ### resource factory with data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Passing a resource factory with data
```

> A resource factory with data is the approach you would use when you wish to side load data into the resource. This will commonly be used when working in an in memory data array and a memory template as it allows the resource data to be reloaded when the data passed is changed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A resource factory with data is the approach used when data needs to be sideloaded into the resource. This will commonly be used when working with an in-memory data array and a memory template, as it allows the resource data to be reloaded when the provided data is changed.
```

Reviewer 2: not sure if the first sentence should end 'sideloaded into the resource' or 'sideloaded into the widget'.

Author: resource, you were correct

```tsx
import { DataTemplate, createResource } from '@dojo/framework/core/resource';
import { List } from './List';

const memoryTemplate: DataTemplate = {
	read: ({ query }, get, put) => {
		let data: any[] = get();
		const filteredData = filter && query ? data.filter((i) => filter(query, i)) : data;
		put(0, filteredData);
		return { data: filteredData, total: filteredData.length };
	}
};

export default factory(function() {
	return (
		<List
			resource={{
				resource: () => createResource(memoryTemplate),
				data: ['dog', 'fish', 'cat']
			}}
		/>
	);
});
```

> ### resource wrapper

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Passing in a resource wrapper
```

> The resource wrapper is obtained from the data middleware. It is used inside widgets when they wish to pass the resource onto a child widget either as a new wrapper with it's own `Options` or as a `shared` wrapper with a common set of `Options`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A resource wrapper is obtained from the data middleware. It is used inside widgets when they wish to pass their resource into a child widget either as a new wrapper with it's own `Options`, or as a `shared` wrapper with a common set of `Options`.
```

```tsx
import { create } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import { data } from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/data';

const factory = create({ data });

export const DataAwareWidget = factory(function ({
	middleware: { data }
}) {
	const { resource, shared } = data();

	return (
		<virtual>
			// this List will be given the underlying resource
			// with no shared `Options
			<List resource={resource} />
			// this List will share `Options` with the
			// parent widget
			<List resource={shared()} />
		</virtual>
	)
}
```

> This shared approach is used within our typeahead widget to share the query between the text input and the list of options. See more information on this in the `sharing` section below.

Reviewer: link to the typeahead example on widgets.dojo.io perhaps?

> This shared approach is used within our typeahead widget to share the query between the text input and the list of options. See more information on this in the `sharing` section below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is used within [Dojo's `Typeahead` widget](https://github.com/dojo/widgets/tree/master/src/typeahead) to share the query between the text input and the list of options. [More information on this is available in the sharing section below](#sharing).
```

> ## The Transform Property

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The transform property
```

> The `transform` property is used to convert the data returned by the `read` function to the format expected by the widget. When a widget uses the standard `data` middleware, `transform` is an optional property. However, when a widget creates a typed middleware using the `createDataMiddleware` function, it becomes a required property and is typed via a generic to ensure that the correct data format is created by the transform config.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `transform` property is used to convert data returned by the `read` function into the format expected by the widget. When a widget uses the standard `data` middleware, `transform` is an optional property. However, when a widget creates a typed middleware using the `createDataMiddleware` function, it becomes a required property and is typed via a generic to ensure that the correct data format is created by the transform configuration.
```

The transform is transparent and occurs in the middleware before data is returned to the widget. When performing queries on the resource, a reverse transform is used to convert the widget values back to the source values provided.

```ts
// resource data
const resourceData = [{ firstname: 'joe', lastname: 'bloggs' }, { firstname: 'jane', lastname: 'doe' }];

// with a transform of
const transform = {
	value: ['firstname']
};

// would create
const transformedData = [{ value: 'joe' }, { value: 'jane' }];
```

> Transforms can also be used to join source keys together to create composite fields. For example, with the same resource data as above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Transforms can also be used to join source keys together to create composite fields. For example, with the same resource data as above:
```

```ts
// with a transform of
const transform = {
	value: ['firstname', 'lastname']
};

// would create
const transformedData = [{ value: 'joe bloggs' }, { value: 'jane doe' }];
```

> ### using a typed transform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Using a typed transform
```

```tsx
import { create } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import { createDataMiddleware } from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/data';

// create the middleware with a generic
const data = createDataMiddleware<{ value: string }>();
const factory = create({ data });

export const DataAwareWidget = factory(function ({
	middleware: { data }
}) {
	const { getOrRead, getOptions } = data();
	const data = getOrRead(getOptions());

	return (
		<virtual>
			{ data.map(item => <span>{item.value}</span>) }
		</virtual>;
	)
}

// in render function elsewhere
<List resource={resource} transform={{ value: ['firstname', 'lastname']}}>
// if a key other than `value` was passed in the transform or no transform at all
// was passed, a type error would occur
```

> ## API

Reviewer: I think this needs to be at the top?

Author: fair

The data middleware API provides the widget with access to the resource data.

> ### get options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### getOptions
```

> `getOptions` returns the current `Options` object. The result of this function should be passed to each of the `get` api functions. It is important to use `getOptions` rather than constructing a new `Options` object in order to ensure that shared resources etc work as expected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`getOptions` returns the current `Options` object. The result of this function should be passed to each of the `get` api functions. It is important to use `getOptions` rather than constructing a new `Options` object in order to ensure that shared resources work as expected.
```

> ### set options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### setOptions
```

> `setOptions` is used to update the current `Options` on the resource wrapper. This will reflect in any other widget using the shared resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`setOptions` is used to update the current `Options` on the resource wrapper. This will reflect in any other widget using the same shared resource.
```

```ts
const { getOptions, setOptions } = data();

setOptions({
	...getOptions(),
	pageNumber: 1
});
```

### get

The `get` function takes an `Options` object and returns data as requested if it is already available on the resource. It will not perform a `read`.

```ts
const { getOptions, get } = data();

const data = get(getOptions());
```

> ### getorread

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### getOrRead
```

> The `getOrRead` function takes an `Options` object and returns the data requested. If it is not already availablee, it will perform a `read`. When the data is available the widget will be invalidated so it can be used in a reactive manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `getOrRead` function takes an `Options` object and returns the requested data. If the data is not already available, it will perform a `read`. Once the data is available, the widget will be invalidated in a reactive manner.
```

```ts
const { getOptions, getOrRead } = data();

const data = getOrRead(getOptions());
```

> ### gettotal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### getTotal
```

The `getTotal` function takes an `Options` object and returns the current total for the given `query`.
When the total changes or becomes available, the widget will be invalidated.

```ts
const { getOptions, getTotal } = data();

const total = getTotal(getOptions());
```

### isLoading

> The `isLoading` function takes an `Options` object and returns a `boolean` to indicate if there is a in flight read in progress for the current `Options`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `isLoading` function takes an `Options` object and returns a `boolean` to indicate if there is a in-flight read underway for the current `Options`.
```

```ts
const { getOptions, isLoading } = data();

const loading = isLoading(getOptions());
```

### isFailed

The `isFailed` function takes an `Options` object and returns a `boolean` to indicate if a read with the current `Options` has failed.

```ts
const { getOptions, isFailed } = data();

const failed = isFailed(getOptions());
```

> ## Data Initialiser Options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Data initializer options
```

> ### Pass in resource

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Passed-in resource
```

> Where the `resource` is passed via a different property or there are multiple resources passed, you can pass the resource directly to the `data` initialiser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `resource` is passed in via a different property, or multiple resources need to be provided, these can be given directly to the `data` initializer.
```

```ts
const { namedResource } = properties();
const { getOptions } = data({ resource: namedResource });
```

### Reset resource

> Where a widget does not wish to share a resource and wants to ensure it always gets it's own set of `Options`, a reset initialiser is available. This may be appropriate when creating a typeahead or other such filtering component. You may not want to risk changing the data query used elsewhere in the application to the `reset` option should be used. This option even creates a new `Options` object when your widget has been passed a `shared` resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Widgets that do not want to share a resource and need to ensure their resource always gets its own set of `Options` can indicate so with the `reset` initializer. This may be appropriate when creating a typeahead or other such filtering component, where a data query may be shared between multiple locations within an application. Each widget instance should ideally require its own unique copy to avoid inadvertently changing data elsewhere in the application. This option will also create a new `Options` object for widgets that have been passed a `shared` resource.
```

```ts
const { getOptions } = data({ reset: true });
```

### Resource key

> When a widget works with multiple sets of resource `Optiona` at the same time, a `key` should be passed for each to the middleware initialiser. This enables the data middleware to differentiate between each of the `Options` objects it is dealing with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a widget needs to work with multiple sets of resource `Options` at the same time, a unique `key` should be passed  to the middleware initializer for each `Options` set. This enables the data middleware to correctly differentiate between multiple resource options.
```

		let data: any[] = get();
		const filteredData = filter && query ? data.filter((i) => filter(query, i)) : data;
		put(0, filteredData);
		return { data: filteredData, total: filteredData.length };
	}
};

export default factory(function() {
	return (
		<List
			resource={{
				resource: () => createResource(memoryTemplate),
				data: ['dog', 'fish', 'cat']
			}}
		/>
	);
});
```

### Passing in a resource wrapper

A resource wrapper is obtained from the data middleware. It is used inside widgets when they wish to pass their resource into a child widget either as a new wrapper with it's own `Options`, or as a `shared` wrapper with a common set of `Options`.

```tsx
import { create } from '@dojo/framework/core/vdom';
import { data } from '@dojo/framework/core/middleware/data';

const factory = create({ data });

export const DataAwareWidget = factory(function ({
	middleware: { data }
}) {
	const { resource, shared } = data();

	return (
		<virtual>
			// this List will be given the underlying resource
			// with no shared `Options
			<List resource={resource} />
			// this List will share `Options` with the
			// parent widget
			<List resource={shared()} />
		</virtual>
	)
}
```

> This approach is used within [Dojo's `Typeahead` widget](https://github.com/dojo/widgets/tree/master/src/typeahead) to share the query between the text input and the list of options. [More information on this is available in the sharing section below](#sharing).

Reviewer 2: Don't think this link is valid anymore (no 'sharing' header in this doc)
